the World Health Organization made a
prediction there will be a mental health
pandemic but this is not something that
has to happen if you want to fix this
you need to sad Guru one of the most
viewed gurus in the world his mission is
to raise every human being to the peak
of their potential who has built one of
the largest nonprofit organizations in
the world we have more than any other
generation ever had in terms of Comforts
and Technologies yet we are miserable
people you want to be something more all
the time that's why you suffer just tell
me is there one thing that human beings
are not suffering somebody's poor they
suffer their poverty somebody becomes
rich they suffer the taxes if they're
not married they suffer get married I
don't have to say
anything you're making up a purpose to
bring some meaning to your life but if
you try to enhance your activity without
enhancing yourself you'll only die of
stress what about trauma you're finding
an excuse for the way you are which you
yourself don't like if something
unpleasant happened to you you have two
choices either you can become wise or
you can become wounded your experience
of life is determined by you if your
happiness depends on what happens on the
outside you being happy is a remote
possibility I want to be happy what's
step one there is a simple practice
which only take 21 minutes and this is
when human beings can do something
absolutely fantastic first thing is
I just want to start this episode with a
message of thanks a thank you to
everybody that Tunes in to listen to
this podcast by doing so you've enabled
me to live out my dream but also for
many members of our team to live out
their dreams too it's one of the
greatest privileges I could never have
dreamed of or imagined in my life to get
to do this to get to learn from these
people to get to have these
conversations to get to interrogate them
from a very selfish perspective trying
to solve problems I have in my life so I
feel like I owe you a huge thank you for
being here and for listening to these
episodes and for making this platform
what it is can I ask you a favor I can't
tell you how much um you can change the
course of this podcast the the course of
the guests were able to invite to the
show and to the course of everything
that we do here just by doing one simple
thing and that simple thing is hitting
that subscribe button helps this channel
more than I could ever explain the
guests on this platform are incredible
because so many of you have hit that
button and I know when we think about
what we want to do together over the
next year on this show a lot of it is
going to be fueled by the amount of you
that are subscribed and that tune into
this show every week so thank you let's
keep doing this and I can't wait to see
what this year brings for this show for
us as a community and for this
[Music]
platform what is
the the mission that you're
on well today you know a few months ago
the wh or the World Health Organization
made a prediction
that there is going to be a mental
health
pandemic at least 5 years ago none of us
knew what is a pandemic today we all
know what is a pandemic and they've gone
further and they said the next stage is
there will be a suicide pandemic just to
put it in perspective in 2020 when the
pandemic was in full swing all over the
world in Japan more people died of
suicide than of the pandemic so we don't
really need the virus that's all I'm
saying because the virus has gotten into
our head because once survival is taken
care of you if you did do not become
conscious the way you sit stand breathe
think emote and function within yourself
if it does not become conscious you will
naturally head downhill this is just
September 23rd I completed 40 Years of
this
work so 40 years
ago I was a young man one
afternoon when I had nothing much to do
somehow an hour and a half Gap was there
for me in the work I was working like
morning 530 in the morning to 11: in the
night building various kinds of
businesses around me so when I got a
break there's a small hill this hill is
a place where we go and for the Youth
when I was a kid I cycled up this hill
we camped on this hill we parted on this
hill if you want to test our motorcycles
we went up the
hill just about anything you want to do
the youth go to chamundi Hill this is
the
thing I just walked up and sat on a rock
my eyes were still
open I thought it's just 10 15 or 20
minutes suddenly I started feeling every
cell in my body literally dripping
ecstasy
I thought this lasted 15 20 minutes but
when I came back to my normal senses 4
and a half hours had passed for the
first time in my adult life tears me and
tears were simply impossible tears to a
point my shirt is all
wet then I shake my skeptical mind and
ask what the hell is happening to me all
I knew was I had hit a gold mind and
there was no context nobody around me
could tell me what was happening with me
nor did I know what was happening with
me this is something that most people
will experience in their lives on a
certain day when they're very happy 24
hours feels like 10
minutes another day when you're
depressed 10 minutes will feel like 24
hours time is a very relative experience
when you're so blissed out what is 2
minutes it's 8 hours 10 hours just gone
like
that so in about 6 to 8 weeks I came to
some kind of stabilization Within Myself
and started experimenting as to what is
happening to me then I
realized if I keep a little distance
from my physiological and psychological
activity that's going on if I just
remove myself a little bit then within
within a few seconds or within a couple
of minutes every cell in my body is
bursting with
ecstasy now this is not just my
experience today we have it measured out
in Howard Medical School how there is
endoc cannabites are bursting out in
people simply because they do a simple
practice so I made a plan in 2 and 1
half years time I will make the whole
world blissed out I knew the methodology
if you just keep a distance it'll
happen 40 years
now today people are saying we are
touching over two billion people last
year our video views have been 3.51
billion so people think that's great but
no that is less than half the population
as far as I'm concerned because I
started thinking I'll make the whole
world blissed out but people are
committed to their miseries either
because of their beliefs or their
ideologies or their compulsive Behavior
within themselves so it needs to happen
to the whole world this is I don't see
this as a mission I just see this as an
expression of my Humanity suppose you
hear a good joke will you tell somebody
who's dear to you or will you cover
yourself with a blanket and tell
yourself of course I'd tell everybody
yeah pretend it was mine that's all I'm
trying to do no
Mission my experience I'm trying to just
rub it off on people some stats for you
that support what you said earlier
someone dies by suicide in the UK every
90 minutes 76% of them are male the
single biggest cause of death for men
under the age of 45 here in the UK is by
Suicide you said you spent a lot a lot
of time around business people and they
appear to be the most unhappy and least
Blissful people I wouldn't say unhappy
stressed out stressed out what is it
that we're doing to the because I I see
myself I must be in that category to
some regard because I've focused most of
my time on you know building businesses
and you know I guess to some extent
material things and SU ESS so I must be
part of that that is a diversionary
tactic in the
sense so you can think that survival
means 2 Ms a day or you can think
survival means bentle so it'll keep you
busy a little
longer still survival process as long as
the survival there's an instinct of
survival and there is a longing to
expand within the human being so for
most human beings these two things are
mixed up it is their Instinct of
survival which is finding expression as
their longing to expand so it doesn't
matter who you are where you are
anybody you want to be something more if
that's something more happens you want
to be something
more you can go on like this how much
more whatever you want if I make it true
for you right now next moment you'll be
thinking what more suppose I make you
the king of not England the
planet don't look at me hopefully I I
will not commit such a
blunder suppose we make you the king of
this planet will you be
fulfilled no you will look at the Moon
you look at other planets you look at
the other galaxies if I give you one
Galaxy you'll say what about the other
Galaxy because there is something within
a human being which wants to expand
limitlessly is that not a good thing
it's not not the reason why I didn't I
didn't say it's not good I'm just saying
you have constipated that longing to
expand that's why you suffer when I say
constipated right now you want to expand
limitlessly can you expand this body
limitlessly no please don't don't try in
the gym I've tried
but so physical expansion is a limited
expansion and your longing is to EXP and
limitlessly because there is something
within you which doesn't like
boundaries the moment see if I imprison
you in a 5x five cubicle you will feel
terribly
imprisoned then tomorrow I will announce
your Liberation and release you into 10x
10 cubicle you will feel wonderful for
two
days then you will feel horribly
imprisoned then we will release you into
100 by 100 cubicle you'll be fine for a
week after that you'll feel miserable
doesn't matter where where I set the
boundary once you feel the boundary you
want to break it so there is something
intrinsic within you which doesn't like
boundaries this is a consequence of the
evolution that you've gone through once
your cerebral cortex flowered now you
don't like
boundaries but you're trying to expand
in an infinite Way by counting 1 2 3 4
5 can you ever count 1 2 3 4 5 when one
day say
infinity no you will only get into
endless counting that's all that's
happening that's why I said your longing
to expand is a limitless process but
right now you're constipated you're
going one little step at a time
constipation means just this it happens
little by
little so so is it a case of trying to
find a balance between your ambition to
expand and to grow and be successful and
peace why should you find balance you
must EXP expand okay so that's what I'm
doing yes no what is the means to become
a boundless expansion if you look at
that then we say Consciousness this is
what raising human consciousness means
because you realize physical expansion
is not a realistic thing we can make
physical arrangements as we want as we
need for our convenience and comfort but
that is not the way to expand expansion
needs to happen in a way that it's not
physical in nature
then you can also own the Universe I can
Al also own the
universe when when I when I look at the
way we're living our lives in the
Western World what you talked about the
who they describe stress as an epidemic
sometimes and they say it's a major
contributor to the diseases that we're
undergoing um where I'm trying to figure
out in my life where I'm going if
there's anywhere where I'm going wrong
because I've I'm building these
businesses and I'm you know I sometimes
ask myself to what end you
know when you say where am I going
wrong the wrong is this the fundamental
wrong is this what is not you if you
think it's you then you're trapped in
that if you think that I am this chair
because we sat on this chair for a
period of time if you think you are this
chair now this chair will go with you
stuck to your backside wherever you go
that's a very ugly thing to do isn't it
it's the same thing right now your
thought you think it's you your emotion
you think it's you you physiological
stuff you think it's you it's pretty
ugly it's just because everybody's got
this chair stuck to the backs side it
looks like it's
normal after all it's convenient
wherever you go you don't have to look
for a chair you got a chair fixed if I
identify with all these things if I
identify with this chair you'll saying
that that becomes a way that's all the
thing is your identity whatever you are
identified with with that becomes a part
of you and is that what's causing us a
lot of our despair if you sit here just
as life what is your
problem as long as you alive everything
is
fine
yeah the only problem is you're
identified with things that you're are
not so the whole lot of confusion about
everything so if you're successful you
suffer if you failure you suffer if
you're see look at the thing
is there one thing that human beings are
not suffering just tell me somebody's
poor they suffer their poverty somebody
becomes rich they suffer the taxes no
children they suffer that give them
children every day pay something or the
other so it looks like whole life is
suffering so somebody makes a philosophy
whole life is suffering you must go to
heaven if you know that much why are you
not
gone you are not gone because you don't
know a damn thing
whether there is a place better than
this somewhere or not you don't know you
just claiming these things to somehow
fix your
psychological sloshing that's happening
inside you're making up things to
somehow believe something so that your
psychology won't just splash all over
the place and go crazy you're trying to
hold yourself in place telling yourself
fairy tals all right so what I'm saying
is do you believe that if you want to
navigate your
life through this time that we have in a
sensible manner the most important thing
is to see life as
is as it
is if I don't see in this room things as
they are I will walk into this table I
will bump into somebody I will do crazy
things every day if I see very clearly
navigating myself through all these
cables and tripods is not a big problem
hello but if I don't see if there's no
Clarity of vision if I'm not seeing
things as they are then what a mess it
is every little thing that's all the
problem problem is not that what you're
doing is wrong the way you're seeing it
is wrong how do I how do I know the way
I'm seeing it is wrong what is the
evidence of that or the symptoms of that
as you giving me the evidence from
statistics that's the evidence MH so I
am not like that obviously you're here
I'm here so both of us didn't commit
suicide so we are not in the
statistic that's not the point you think
those people who committed suicide
everything was wrong with their
life
no not everything was wrong with their
life a few things as it goes wrong in
your life my life everybody's life some
things don't work all right right in
everybody's life something doesn't work
in the outside world if everything is
working for you obviously you're living
a very Petty life in my life 95% of the
things that I want doesn't happen only
5% happens because I'm trying to fix
everything in the world most of the
things don't happen so if anybody wants
to die of frustration it must be me but
I will not because no matter what I will
die blessed out I live blessed out iish
doubt because what I do what the
situation is around me and how I am are
never connected I'm the way I am I'll do
my best has has it required you to train
yourself to sort of disattach from it is
no no no see uh this is all because see
the problem is too much
uh spiritual jargon is going all over
the world because every idiot who's read
two books can write her next book
book if you read two books there was a
time when people read 10 books and then
wrote one book that was called plagarism
now they read two books and they write
the third
book say your your background is full of
books I hope you not read all of them
I've only read two and I'm writing
one uh because just about everybody is
writing it's all right it's freedom of
expression they can write what they want
but these are two things there is
expression and there is
perception which should you invest in
more
perception if you perceive well your
expression will be
valuable right now everybody's on
expression binge without perceiving a
damn
[Laughter]
thing there will be so many people that
are going through dress at work in their
relationships in their household
listening to this going how how do I
live blissed out like he does like what
what's step one in that
staircase I'll tell
you see whatever you call it you call it
by whatever name you want stress anxiety
tension depression bipolar this one that
one many
things I was talking to some of the top
uh psychiatrists in UK
and they told me there are 72 varieties
of psychological ailments I thought they
may be half a dozen but they said there
are 72 varieties of psychological
ailments I was really surprised 72
that's like a golf game you
know then I asked what are these they
told me quite a few things one of the
things they told was compulsive nose
picking even if they're bleeding in the
nose they can't stop
it that explains everything in a way
compulsive nose picking leave the nose
picking it's
compulsiveness you're compulsive in your
thought compulsive in your emotion
compulsive in your actions that's all
the problem is how do you fix compulsion
compulsiveness if this room is dark how
do you fix it let's do one thing both of
us fight with this darkness and push it
out of the window there's no such thing
if you turn on the light it's gone
so there is no substitute for
Consciousness if you become conscious
compulsive behavior is gone suppose you
are in thought emotion action and energy
you are not compulsive that you can
create whatever thought you want
whatever emotion you want would you keep
yourself blessed out or miserable what's
your
choice blessed
out for yourself every human being for
themselves they want the highest level
of pleasantness so the intent is already
there you don't I don't have to inspire
them be blissed out there's no such
philosophy every human being wants the
highest level of pleasantness for
themselves those who think it's hopeless
here they are the ones who created
heaven they said there is a place which
is always
pleasant but they don't have any proof
that we are all we are not already in
heaven and making a mess out of that
hello do you do you think this is happen
this is planet Earth and it's a
fantastic place and it's the most
fantastic place we have seen in the
known
universe do you think there's Heaven
though do you think there's somewhere
else we go to that is another world
after this one everybody who thinks
there is one they must go
today hello if they if they have better
accommodation somewhere than London
should they not go did people not rush
to America at one
time why are they not going no they want
you to go this is not
good true see whatever kind of mental
ailment you talk about essentially when
your intelligence turn against you
there's no power in the universe which
can help you but why is my intelligence
turn turning against me somewhere we
have not learned how to handle it isn't
it MH your education systems your
Society nowhere is there anything to
teach a child how to handle their own
intelligence their own emotions their
own thoughts there is no such thing all
fixing mechanic shop you know repair
jobs everywhere leave the repair jobs
the simple thing is
this the reason why people are
struggling with this is they have
uh pardon my words but uh otherwise
people won't get it they have a mental
diarrhea this doesn't create create
anything except
distress anything that runs loose
without your control is called
diarrhea why has it
happened even today even if somebody
gets physical diarrhea immediately
somebody will pop a pill but
traditionally what did we do somebody
has diarrhea first thing is we
understood we have eaten something wrong
first thing we did was just don't eat
just drink water and wait and next
identify what did I eat yesterday or
today morning what happened to me what
is it that I consumed which caused this
and avoid that but now we will plug it
in no if you plug it in it'll all rise
within yourself this all that's
happening right now our way of doing
life is very forceful when I had mental
diarrhea last time the last time I I had
mental diarrhea that kind of
overthinking causes anxiety all those
things no no let me correct this there
is no overthinking I'm saying people are
not not thinking enough this is a
serious problem but they think they're
overthinking they are not overthinking
it's a diarrhea it's happening why is it
happening something wrong food has gone
in what is the wrong food this is all it
is the moment you identify yourself with
something that you are not your mind you
cannot stop do what you
want do whatever you want it will not
stop so that that anxiety that people
experience where they start remunerating
about the future or something that's
happened that is because let me put it
this way this this question I understand
what you're
saying see what is it that human beings
are suffering what happened 10 years ago
they're still suffering what may happen
day after tomorrow they're already
suffering this what you
saying what happened 10 years ago is it
here now does it exist no what may
happen Day After Tomorrow does it exist
here no so if you're suffering something
that does not
exist what does it mean tell me bluntly
if you're suffering something that
doesn't exist it's like insanity but it
feels like it is
insanity it is insanity that's why I'm
saying once you start doing this how far
you go when will you graduate when will
you end up in a doctor's place when will
you end up in Asylum is a question of
time but now World bodies are predicting
is going to happen large scale very soon
let me give you an example so someone
has a sick child or or they just lost
their job and they're thinking over and
over again about you know oh my God my
child's going to die I'm going to lose
my job and then I can't feed myself I'm
going to lose my house then I'm going to
be on the street that kind of
remuneration and stress that that
anxiety they experience on a day-to-day
basis bis because they're scared of
losing something which might you know
they believe will end them up on the
street or lose their job or they won't
be able to feed their family that kind
of Torment MH I wouldn't want to put
those two things in the same level
losing a child and losing a job all
right losing a child is a different
thing it's a completely different thing
obviously there will be a certain amount
of pain in any human being that's
different so let say such a terrible
thing we had to face that we may lose
our
child tell me can you do the best for
the
child if you are in your sanity or is it
good to go into
Insanity I feel like it takes a
tremendous discipline now what it takes
we'll see later but I'm just asking a
fundamental question okay it well it
makes more sense not to go into Insanity
yes sanity will make a difference maybe
we can save the child maybe we cannot
because all aspects of life we don't
determine our experience we can
determine see what happens in the world
around you even if you're just two
people in the
family never will it happen 100% your
way if you try nobody will be around you
it's as simple as that I've read your
story so I know that there's moments in
your life where you've lost people that
you loved lot of people not one or two
because my family is so large almost
every other day I burying somebody who's
very dear to me which one of those
moments impacted you the most and did
any of them drive you into the insanity
that we're talking about
no I don't let anything drive me into
insanity this is a brief amount of time
that you have as
life here we create many things
you're creating businesses I have large
movements where millions of people are
involved there are
relationships you cannot take these
things lightly because other lives are
involved but you cannot prevent anybody
from
dying you can attend to them if if
something is going to happen to them you
can make attempts to save them but you
cannot prevent anybody from absolutely
dying including yourself
this a fact so the only two things that
we have is a certain amount of time and
a certain amount of energy this is all
that you call as life what do you want
to make out of it you want to make a
mess out of it see the thing is first of
all they living an emotionally
constipated life they only loved their
child I saw everybody as mine everything
that happen hurts but that's part of it
if you walk in a forest there are thongs
in your feet but but this doesn't mean
you don't enjoy the forest all right do
you have moments of
sadness see you're asking a very
question which is hard for me to say
because I have done this to myself that
nothing happens within
me the way I don't want
it if that was your situation nothing
happens within
you unconsciously everything that
happens happens happens the way you want
within yourself what is the experience
that you want to have right now is
always determined by you what would be
your choice grief and misery is it no
see you are the only creature who can
decide your way of
being no matter what is the surrounding
every other creature is an instinctive
reaction to what's happening around them
because they are only fired by their
survival Instinct they don't have any
other aspiration
once their stomach is full their life is
settled for a human being stomach empty
there's only one problem stomach full
100 problems because life doesn't settle
with
survival you want to be something else
all the time the problem is you a being
you're supposed to know how to be how
far away have human beings gone from the
definition or that
aspiration so is an incorrect question
to ask then because I asked you if you
if you've you experience
sadness if I want to I do if you want to
you do okay I said it doesn't happen as
it doesn't happen by itself if I want I
can be loving if I want I can be joyful
if I want I can be sad yes when somebody
dear to you is no more you allow
yourself that but do you stop doing
anything
no that sense of purpose you have the
most popular question that young people
ask me is is about passion and purpose
they they've been indoctrinated by
Society to think that they have this one
purpose and their big issue is they
can't seem to find it so like an Easter
egg they they're going in Hunt of what's
my purpose how do I know once I've
reached my purpose for people that are
working now in jobs um listening to this
on their way on the tube to work how
what is this this subject of purpose and
passion what do I commit my life to how
do we go about answering that see if you
get absolutely committed to your purpose
you will be called a fanatic if you are
willing to do whatever it takes to
achieve that you will be called a
terrorist so there is no purpose to life
if you if you are not a vested interest
and you can be not a vested interest
only when you're joyful by your own
nature that how you are is determined by
you so this is the fundamental you have
to set that your experience of life is
determined by you when I say experience
of life people are always thinking
experiences happen because of external
stimuli no if you dream of a tiger you
can experience fear isn't it you can you
can dream of somebody beautiful and
experience love yes or no so I'm saying
all experiences cause from within you
Human Experience happens from within you
never from outside of you there may be a
stimuli now this stimuli means just like
this you know uh you're too young to
know these things there used to be wax
all cars in this country they always
used to park it in a slope like this
because morning you need two people to
push that car in the morning in 50s and
60s I'm
saying later on they had crank start you
need one person person to do that
otherwi you can't get your car started
today all cars are self
start I'm asking you your peace your joy
your love your blissfulness would you
want to keep it on self start or push
out self I wouldn't want it to rely on
this is the question you're asking
repeatedly you want Push do don't be on
pusht inner experiences are always in
self start outside world will never
happen 100% our way little bit your way
a little bit my way a little bit
somebody else's way and that's how it
should be because everything happened
your way where the hell do I
go it doesn't happen your way or my way
it's
fine it is only fine if you're joyful by
your own nature but if your happiness
depends on what happens on the outside
then you being happy is a remote
possibility I want to be happy happy on
my own
nature I I hear what you said however
I'm going to walk out of this room and I
don't know something's going to annoy me
maybe my words are even wrong but then
I'll immediately snap back into the sort
of unconscious I don't know dismay or
despair how does one go about like the
first step in becoming Happy by our own
nature do you think your life is
worthwhile your life is worth
investing about 32 hours of focus time
upon it your life yes if you think so
you should do that this is what the
process that I have called it as inner
engineering 32 hours of focus time book
is just a a large brocher you
know because there is a practice
involved when I say a practice a simple
practice which only 21 minutes of
practice to teach this 21 minute
practice we take 32 hours of orientation
because without that it won't happen you
need to understand how the mechanism of
your own thoughts why are they hit if
your hand is punching you in the face
why is it doing that you need to
understand otherwise just holding it
down is not the answer this is the most
sophisticated machine on the planet have
you read the users manual the users
manual for my body for yourself as a
life no I didn't know there was one
so when do you want to do it towards the
end of the life is when people think
they should do it it's like you got
yourself your iPad should you read the
users manual in the first three days or
after 3 years when you're getting rid of
the machine when I first get it yes but
nobody gives me the uses manual for for
myself no no the thing is it's inbuilt
you have to just pay attention how do I
do that so we'll do one thing right now
shall we do a simple experiment with
this you'll have to do this with your
eyes closed okay but right now look at
me Dam afterward you can do you you
place your palms like this facing down
upon your thigh gently placed so you
will start breathing slightly deeper 10
15% deeper than normal don't do it yet
hello yeah and as you're doing it I will
say switch then you turn your hands
around gently upon your thigh like this
and again when I say switch get back
this way okay in these two conditions
something about your breath will change
I will also give you a clue what could
be Chang changing where the air is
filling up in your lungs how it fills up
something about it will change or let me
put it this way the maximum expansion
and contraction in which part of the
chest is it happening this way which way
this way which way just notice that just
hold your palms facing down close your
eyes Okay and when you say switch turn
my hands over right yes breathe slightly
deeper not very forcefully just 10 15%
more notice where the maximum expansion
and contraction is
happening
switch switch
again please open your eyes there's some
difference yeah what is
it uh in what part I feel how I feel no
what I breathing where is the maximum
expans T and contraction when you
holding two different postures um I felt
like
my my chest and my belly were expanding
more when I switch when I was switching
I felt like I was just getting more air
into my body let me tell you what's
happening you can experiment by yourself
and see when you have your hands facing
together facing down with all fingers
together maximum expansion contraction
is happening in the lower low of the
lung yeah yeah if you turn it around it
shift to the middle Lo of the
lung a middle Lo being much larger you
feel more but actually it's the shift so
I'm saying just by turning your hands
around like this the very way you
breathe is altering itself it's not just
the breath the very way your life energy
function is altering itself how many
times in a day unconsciously are
you now you're setting your energies
into turmoil and hoping to be peaceful
it will not work and I'm happy it
doesn't work because if it works for you
by doing wild things and still
everything is peaceful and wonderful
within you then what is the use of my
life spending a whole lifetime paying
attention to every little thing that's
happening here I'm saying if you can
drive blind on the London streets and
not hit anything a good driver will feel
insulted isn't
it that's all I'm saying but how do we
learned the use manual for ourselves
though so you know is it it's not
something we go and read in a book you
say the problem is this all your sense
organs are Outward
Bound because they are survival
instruments your sense organs your
ability to see hear smell taste and
touch are essentially your survival
instruments life cannot be enhanced by
them you can only Survive by better if
you see better than me you can survive
better than me if you hear better than
me you can survive better than me but
this life will not feel enhanced by
perceiving more through the five sense
organs and they're all Outward Bound you
can see me can you roll your eyeballs
Inward and scan yourself no you can hear
that so much happening in the body can
you hear that
no so all your sense organs are only to
perceive what's happening around around
you not to perceive what's within you so
to perceive within you you need to turn
inward that needs a little because it's
not survival something has to be done
you know how to write English language
yeah yes to learn that damn 26 alphabets
you took some effort isn't it hello yeah
it did it took some effort and it took
some guidance because anything that's
beyond survival needs striving that
striving is missing in the societ
there was a time there was a time where
in the civilization that we refer refer
to as Hindustan or Barat or today being
the political country is being called as
India in this culture 70% of the people
were invested in inward
well-being because of that they became
super enhanced because of that
enhancement they became so wealthy in
everything rich in mathematics rich in
astronomy rich in business rich in in
trade rich in Industry it was the
richest nation on the planet just 300
years ago see everybody from here
whether it's English or French or
Portuguese everybody went to India you
think in search of poverty in search of
wealth isn't it MH it became like that
effortlessly without conquering anybody
without having large armies because
people invested in enhancing themselves
and I'm telling you if you try to
enhance your activity without enhancing
yourself you'll only die of stress this
is what is happening to unfortunately
whole lot of CEOs I'm concerned about
this because a CEO means you gave
something that is important that needs
to happen in the world into his hands
his or her hands and if they are
stressed out what misery will they
create for the rest of the
world it's very
important that journey to taking care of
ourselves like I had to learn how to
read a book or to learn language no I'm
saying anything that's not survival yeah
will not come naturally you have to
strive this Society has to create that
longing being peaceful and joyful is
more important for a human being's
experience of life than me being better
than you that TR that orientation the
society has to create isn't
it I agree
I agree it just
[Music]
seems Seems like there's such a powerful
narrative coming from social media
magazines TV movies that are yes yes I'm
not denying that making us
individualistic and it's not even
individualistic it's always about me
being better than you it started from
the kindergarten school there itself
they told you I am first rank you are
third rank from there it started I am
better than
you
so the whole life is about being better
than somebody means essentially what it
means is I enjoy your
failures does it sound like joy to you
or sickness to
you sounds like a sickness it is a
sickness we're building it to our
children right from day one what about
trauma I was thinking about early trauma
and how that drives us to
be drives us away from a life of
contentment drives us towards you know a
life where we might end up in prison or
we might be dysfunctional in other ways
because of something early that happened
when we were seven years old you know
could be a small thing or a big trauma
that has orientated us to be greedy or
to be selfish or to be in the worst case
maybe to hurt others see essentially
you're finding an
excuse for the way you are which you
yourself don't
like
see if something unpleasant happened to
you you have two choices either you can
become wise or you can become wounded
choose more unpleasant things happen to
happen to you than anybody else you must
be the wisest man
soonest no you choose to be wounded
because you carry this wound like a
badge and so that you can cause the same
wound to others what's the point when
you know the pain of it how do you do
the same thing to
me but it becomes a
survival technique to there is no excuse
the thing is just this instead of
intelligently consciously responding to
life you are reacting like any other
creature that's
all so something bad happens to me when
I'm seven years old and these neurons
fire in my brain that make me react bad
this is all WhatsApp uh
neurology whoever told you these things
right now we have a research center in
Harvard Medical School in Beth Israel
Hospital okay right now in October this
month on 17th to 21st we have a
International Conference there in these
five six years of its existence they
have done a lot of study one thing they
found was I can't go into all the
scientific things I'm not a scientist
but one important thing is
this simple 21 minute practice I'm
talking about people who did this for
over 6 to 8 weeks the endoc canonizes in
their system is 70% higher than what is
considered to be
normal what is normal for a happy person
it's 70% higher than that you know
what's endoc canaban no you know what's
cannabis yeah yes every human being has
cannabis receptors this doesn't mean
that this body was created to smoke
cannabis you are supposed to produce it
when you don't produce it you try to
substitute from outside that's a
different matter let me not go into that
aspect but 70% higher what this means is
it is about 23% higher than what happens
in sexual orgasm or extreme
exercise simply sitting here so if you
felt like that every moment of your life
do I have to tell you don't Rob don't
kill don't do this no no that's all you
need to we've not fixed that one thing
see when you were a child when you were
5 years of
age you were just bubbling with Joy by
your own nature isn't it somebody had to
work hard to make you unhappy at that
time but now somebody has to work hard
to make you happy what happened to the
equation if you had really grown up five
years if you're that happy by the time
you're 31 you should have been
ecstatic isn't
it people typically do feel more
miserable as they age they feel more
stressed and more stubborn and more
bitter no they're carrying more baggage
that's all as you'll know this podcast
is sponsored by H and one of my favorite
products that they've ever created is
their hu Daily Greens it actually
performed so well when we released it
that it sold out completely and the only
thing I'm back here to say to you guys
is that it's now back in stock it tastes
amazing and it's actually got 91
vitamins and minerals and whole food
ingredients in one scoop it's nice not
to have to think about taking lots of
different pills and vitamins in the
morning I can just take this and I know
that I'm giving my body a good dose of
all the vitamins and minerals that it
needs every morning it's a lot better
tasting than having to force down some
of the other green powders I've tried
and it's really reassuring to to know
that I'm looking after my body properly
unfortunately and currently this product
is only available in the US so anyone in
the USA head to hu.com to get it before
it runs out again but anyone that's not
in the US and wants it to come to their
country please send me a DM a direct
message and I'll speak to the team at hu
in our board meetings and I'll let them
know that you want it in your country
quick one just want to talk to you about
our sponsor super quick called LinkedIn
jobs hiring is one of the most important
steps in your business and without good
people there is literally no company
trust me I found out along the way that
your business is nothing without good
people you want to be 100% certain that
you have access to the best candidates
available and that's why I need you to
check out LinkedIn jobs LinkedIn jobs
helps you to find the right people for
your team faster and for free so when
I'm expanding any of my teams in any of
my companies I go straight to LinkedIn
and I'd highly recommend you do the same
there are simple tools like screening
questions which make it easy to focus on
candidates with the right skills and
experience so you can quickly prior
prioritize who you'd like to interview
and hire it's why small businesses rate
LinkedIn jobs number one in delivering
quality hirs versus leading competitors
LinkedIn jobs helps you find the
qualified candidates you want to talk to
faster post your job for free at
linkedin.com
doac that's linkedin.com
doac to post your job for free terms and
conditions apply you said something
earlier about um humans are the most
intelligent species on Earth aren't we
you have a doubt about that for now art
artificial intelligence I wanted to ask
you about this no artificial
intelligence we'll come to that first
establish
this artificial intelligence is created
by human beings isn't it yes then how
did it become more intelligent than
me uh read more books
no
see
everything everything that's man-made
here in this world came out of human
intelligence and it's still not a full
expression of our intelligence still
there are many many more things we can
do you are thinking mind means
intelligence means just intellectual
process because of that you think the
phone is smarter than you because it has
better memory and it has better
Computing Computing process so all those
who are on one dimensional intelligence
which is
intellect which is a European problem if
you ask me you you were exited but still
you European you know m in culture I
know you brexit it
but
so it's in Europe that suddenly human
thought became very
Eliz why it became like this is the
dogmatic religious beliefs which did not
allow people to think for themselves if
you thought anything other than what's
written in the book you're dead they
made this for a few centuries so
suddenly when they broke away from that
and started thinking for themselves they
suddenly thought this is Liberation and
they eiz human thought and we crafted
the whole education system on the planet
based on that today you're just using
one dimension of your intelligence which
is intellect thought process is thought
to be everything where one of them went
to the extent of saying I think so I
exist what are the other dimensions of
human intellect will come will come I'm
asking you do you exist because you
think or because you exist you think
because I exist I think yeah you may
think if you want or you may not think
it's up to you so because you exist Your
Existence is important Your Existence is
it because you're seeing me that you
exist even if you close your eyes you
still exist isn't it yeah if you don't
hear anything you still exist so your
existence is fundamental these are all
activities of seeing hearing smelling
thinking emoting these are all
activities of your existence the life
that you are but we got it all upside
down and how how do you expect it to
work because another aspect is if I ask
you a simple question would you want
your intellect to be sharp or blunt
what's your answer sharp
sharp if I give you a sharp instrument
let's say we give you a very sharp
knife now you must be very conscious
have you move your hand if you're little
la la laa kind
la la la la la if you do interes will
come out yes or no
yes we don't give a knife to a child's
hand only because of this because his
hand is not steady not because knife is
dangerous never in the history has it
ever happened a knife jumped up and
stabbed somebody it never happened
believe me I've been following the
news it is only the hand that whals it
it can cut a vegetable and make your
meal
or it can do surgery and save somebody's
life or stab somebody and take their
life all these things the hand can do
not the knife so right now your
intellect is a shop
instrument once you have a shop
instrument you must know how to hold it
this is simply not there everybody's
cutting themselves up and they think
something is wrong with life you can
call the stress anxiety misery whatever
you want essentially you have a Shar
instrument and you're unconscious so
you're cutting yourself up well that
instrument that sharp instrument in a
world where we're building machines that
have the intelligence of a million
people and those machines can make
decisions so theoretically the machine
can now decide to send a missile at a
country on its own because of but if we
had the intelligence we wouldn't make a
Melle yeah but we we have and this is
what I'm concerned about is I've sat
here with all these AI experts and
they're talking about the issue they're
telling me they're not going to be able
to contain this artificial intelligence
uh
see let me tell you an
example I've spoken about this before I
don't know if I should repeat that but
let me say this to you I remember this
very clearly it was
1972 you didn't
exist and for the first time they
installed a Gantry in the port in Mumbai
called the mazagon docks in the docks
they put up a Gantry till then as it was
done everywhere in the
world maybe a little further
back there were labor who were going up
into the ships and getting the sacks out
and unloading those days the largest
vessels were about
125 125,000 to 150,000 tons they would
take 24 to 28 days to unload one
vessel so they installed a Gantry so all
of them went on strike a big strike
which paralyzed Mumbai City at that time
it was Bombay it got completely
paralyzed because all the labor went on
strike I'm sure many such labor strikes
have happened here every time a new
machine was installed people went on
strike because their argument was if you
put this machine this is going to unload
a ship in one day what are we supposed
to do with our muscle we got this muscle
now what are we supposed to do they went
on strike this is what now the
professors academics all the
intellectual people who only invested in
their intellect or now saying what are
we supposed to do the machine will do
everything it's fantastic isn't it all
the machines are doing all the hard work
for
you but but when the machines can think
the machines could make a decision that
they want to do things that AR only
machines
think
do only machines think only machines
think only if you have reduced yourself
to become a mechanical thing you're only
thinking about life otherwise there's a
way of opening yourself up to life and
experience the magic of life right now
you're trapped in the logic of life when
I say the logic of Life logic is the
foundation it's very very
important but suppose in this building
we make you in the
foundations today it's called basement
but it's actually a dungeon we used to
lock up people there or animals or
something if you want somebody to have a
horrible life you put them in the
foundations that's all I'm saying if you
live with the foundations of your life
which is your logic you will live a bad
life no matter where you are even if I
put you up in a palace you still suffer
are you scared at all are you concerned
at all humans have made nuclear bombs
now they've made made this thing called
artificial intelligence which is
accelerating are you concerned at all
that it'll get into the wrong hands and
people who are artificial intelligence
means at least the human error will be
taken out I'm happy about that the human
error yeah there are so many idiots who
can do anything halfrain people get to
the top of the nation they could do
anything at least artificial
intelligence means there'll be a proper
process before we launch anything so
you're happy about artificial
intelligence I'm happy about any Dev
velopment because essentially how I see
is let me tell you my experience first
experience of an intelligent machine I
was probably 12 13 years old I was uh in
my ninth
standard and I went to school only when
I had to most of the time I got lost on
the way but when I went I thought this
was just an unnecessary nonsense in my
life so I spent most of the time in the
library and barely went to the classroom
like
me so
one day somebody brought a flatbed
calculator maybe you not even seen one
like that you all doing on the phone and
iPad flatbed calculator is most of it is
flat one little screen like this we've
never seen anything like
this so you say you know 185 into 365
took answer is right there I looked at
it and I felt really insulted why the
hell are they tormenting me in a
mathematics class when this machine is
there why can't they make one machine
for chemistry one machine for physics
one machine for every damn thing I
enjoyed swimming in The Lakes I enjoyed
sitting on the trees I enjoyed loitering
around all over the
countryside I learned my life like that
but this nonsense why am I going through
this when this silly machine can do this
at last my dream is coming true I'm very
happy everything that human beings can
do see this silly mentality what will
happen to our jobs why do you need a
job all you need is food to survive
suppose everybody on the planet is fed I
know those guys idiots will become
drunkards and drug addicts that's a
different matter but if everybody's fed
and you don't have to worry about your
living this is when human beings can do
something absolutely fantastic right now
they're spending their life just to earn
a
living when will they make a life out of
themselves
what you said sounds almost identical to
what the founder and the CEO of open AI
who made chat GPT which is leading the
leading the way at the moment said
literally yesterday uh in a interview he
did he said if we can get people to a
point where they don't have to worry
about tedious jobs then they can live
these Blissful lives we'll do one thing
we'll remove all the Earth moving
machines and everything give everybody a
pickaxe and a crow bar and a spade let
them all go back to the mines and
construction everywhere let them start
doing physically will they protest or no
they will protest Ah that's what will
happen in 50 years time if you ask them
to multiply they'll protest that's what
I said the moment first moment I saw the
calculator I said what this is this
nonsense why am I doing all this when I
can do Tok to to here the the
counterargument to that is that people
need a sense of like purpose something
to you need a false purpose to live
because you have not even made an
attempt to understand what this life is
about what its potential is about you
need a false purpose you go and dig in
the mind and it's your purpose and then
you produce children two children
putting bread on the table is a big
purpose to your life silliest way to
live for a human
being that's how most people live
unfortunately that's the kind of world
we have created and the world that if
you could wave a one now and create a
different World which I know you're
trying to do in fact you're Bu you're
building a a city in America right
you're part of a
project this is why I find it so
fascinating because I look at the way
we've designed society and we're so it's
so stubborn in the way we've designed it
I often wonder if we're going to have to
go back to a blank canvas and redesign
it again from the ground up that's never
going to happen where is a blank canvas
how do you create a blank canvas that's
never going to happen the desert
somewhere you have to slowly see the
thing is this happened can I tell you a
joke
please one day a cardiologist a famous
cardiologist a doctor went because he
was driving an Aston Martin and it gives
trouble you
know he went to the
garage and the mechanic said uh yes
doctor leave the car here evening I'll
have it
ready the doctor took took the taxi and
went to the hospital and came back in
the evening the mechanic had not even
touched it then I said hey why is it not
already oh no doc this is this that
tomorrow morning I'll have it ready
for tomorrow morning he came car was not
ready said hey what are you trying to do
why is it that you're not doing then
mechanic said huh see I fix your engine
you pay me
but you fix somebody's heart and they
pay you
50,000 why is that you fixing an engine
I'm fixing an
engine doctor said try to fix it when
it's
running if you could demolish everything
and rebuild it's very easy the thing is
you have to rebuild it when it's on that
is the whole challenge isn't it that
goes for individual human being that
goes for the society that goes for the
world we we have to rebuild it when it's
still functioning after you demolish
means are you inviting a nuclear
Holocaust so that later on we can
rebuild
it it's not a good idea no that's not
what we
want and that's why the practice that
you described yes matters because it
doesn't matter even if you're Manning a
nuclear bomb let's say it's your job to
press the button you waiting
there if you are miserable frustrated
depressed even without a you may press
if it was in your hand sometimes it may
happen but if you're joyful Blissful
naturally you look at see this is
something people don't understand people
think love brings them happiness it's
not true if you're very joyful you will
look at look upon everything in a loving
manner because what you call is Joy love
let me put it this
way if your body becomes
pleasant we call this health you want it
yes if it becomes very pleasant we call
it pleasure you want it
yes if your mind becomes pleasant we
call this peace you
want only to create pleasantness in your
surroundings do you need the cooperation
of various people and many forces around
you but to create pleasantness in your
body mind emotion and energy is 100%
your business if you were the only
person on this planet would you know
whether you're good or
bad I wouldn't know so it is only by
comparison that you know that you're
good but if you are the only person on
this planet if you were joyful would you
know you're joyful yes that's important
so you're saying focus on Joy and how we
feel versus good or bad no I don't I'm
not saying focus on Joy I'm just saying
you understand this your
interiority can happen 100% your way if
you are
willing external things will not happen
100% our way we have to strive some
things happen our way many things don't
happen our way but internally if you're
happening your way you will keep
yourself very pleasant when you're
pleasant we can expect Pleasant things
from you when you're unpleasant I expect
Pleasant things from you where is it
going to happen people in the name of
religion in the Name of Love in the name
of caring they've done Terrible Things
isn't
it
most horrendous things have been
done a question I've often asked myself
is am I you talked about like fake
purpose a second ago how do how do I
know if the because when you interview
people and you say like what's your
purpose or what's your mission they'll
sit here and they'll give me lots of
things right some of them might be I
want to help I'm just fooling around I
have no Mission no no not you I'm saying
you ask a kid on the the street what's
your mission younger kids these days
will say they they want to save the
world or they want to they want to be a
public speaker or they want to be a
YouTuber H do you view those as fake
Ambitions in that from confused people
see I did not say fake Ambitions the
thing is you're making up a purpose to
bring some meaning to your life yeah
what you need to understand is life is a
phenomena beyond all meanings meanings
is an ailment of your mind only human
mind needs meanings sun comes up in the
morning doesn't need a
meaning full moon out there doesn't need
a meaning tired doesn't need a meaning
only place where you need a meaning is
your head your mind needs a meaning why
have you seen this you've been at some
point at least for moments you've been
very joyful blissed out you've been at
that time do you ask what is is the
meaning of
life no no only when you're miserable
it's important so you create one problem
and then you create another problem and
another problem and you think it's a
solution no meaning is a serious
problem meaning has become meaningful
for somebody only because they're in
some way distressed the the process of
life and the experience of life has
become burdensome why am I carrying this
I want a meaning for the burden that I'm
bearing
if life was a blissful process why would
you care what is the meaning so when
people people must ask you all the time
what's the meaning of life and you must
then does that suggest that they are
absent of bliss see this meaning problem
is a very Western problem in the Eastern
world we don't ask for meaning we are
always looking for profoundness of
Life what's the difference the
difference is digging deeper into
yourself
and creating something around your head
are two different things meaning is so
meaning is looking outside for a reason
outside or inside doesn't matter but
you're trying to build a psychological
solution to an existential
reality and you have to accept that ex
existential
reality the existential reality is you
don't know where the hell you came from
and I don't know where I'm going and you
don't know where you're going you just
here for a brief amount of time and you
think you are the center of the world
that means you must be very religious
because it's the religious people who
went on propagating that this planet is
the center of the universe though in
India for over 6,000 years people have
known planet is round and it goes around
the Sun clearly there are drawings and
there are books there are documents
which clearly say that but people who
are following dogmatic religious
processes they they propagated that this
is the center of the
universe now will they say we said what
is wrong and apologize for that no
because when I think I am the center of
the universe I will be doing so many
idiotic
things you must apologize if you are the
one who taught me that
nonsense so
life doesn't have a birth let me tell
you given mean this happened there was a
Bishop in his tumul at that time it was
Constantinople you know I'm I mean I'm
not trying to insult any Community but
this actually happened so I'm quoting
the thing in
1924 this bishop was part of the Greek
Orthodox
Church very Orthodox church and he's a
bishop so all his life he's a man of
cloth he was there but being in his
tumble you know all these exotic stories
come wafting AC across the Bosphorus
from India about the mystics about the
yogis about many many things India is
full of stories like this and for ages
these things have been coming and
excited people to travel to the east all
this stuff so he always wanted to go to
India and meet a real Yogi or a
Mystic but being a man of cloth he
couldn't decide where he goes and
doesn't go when he was over 60 years of
age he got an opportunity to go to India
he went to Southern India and found a
good guide who could guide him and the
guide took him and said see on this
particular Mountain if you go this way
this way this way he gave all the
landmarks if you go there there's a cave
there there is a yogi that is a man
you're looking for so our Bishop went
all the way up mountains are not kind to
people who lived in churches or in
indoors you know they don't care who you
are uh they trouble you so with great
difficulty he went up when he went to
that place just outside the cave a yogi
was sitting totally blissed out with his
eyes closed so you the bishop had heard
that if you see a yogi you must
prostrate before him so he went down and
he was not fit for those kind of
postures but with great difficulty he
went down huffing puffing he stood up
again hearing all the commotion the yogi
opened his eyes and
smiled then the bishop asked can I ask
you a question this is the first
introduction
the yogi laughed and said well by all
means you can ask a
question then the bishop asked what is
life see as a human being you have the
intelligence to ask this question when
you were 8 years of
age well in your childishness you missed
it at least when you were 16 you should
have
asked definitely you have the
intelligence to ask that question but
now you're well over 60 now you're
asking what is life but it's okay it's
better late than never you know so when
he said that Yogi went into
raptures life life is like the fragrance
of
jasman you know upon the gentle Prince
spring
Breeze the bishop said what fragrance of
Jasmine upon gentle spring
Breeze my teacher told me life is like a
thorn once it gets into you if you sit
it hurts if you stand it hurts if you
lie down it hurts and you are saying it
is like the fragrance of Jasmine upon
gentle spring Breeze then the yogi
laughed and said well that's his
life you must understand your experience
of life is determined by you it's your
choice the last thing I wanted to ask
you about about is a campaign you've
recently um been putting a lot of effort
into which is the save soil campaign I
want to know why you're doing that and
why that message in campaign is so
important for all of us one important
element of why human beings will become
mentally ill in the next 15 to 20 years
lot of people are estimating there may
not be a single family left without one
mentally ill person at least that's what
they're saying so this mental illness
why see one thing is in the last 100
years of industrial level of Agriculture
one thing that's happened is we are only
seeing soil as a resource soil is not a
resource it's your Source it is the
source of your life it is the largest
living substance or system on the planet
if you take a handful of soil it has 8
to 10 billion organisms in it it is the
most intense tense life and the largest
living system not just on the planet in
the known universe it is the largest
living system but still over 80% of the
nations are treating soil as a resource
which they think they can fix it by
adding a chemical or take away chemical
let me come to this very quickly what is
the problem see if today all the insects
disappear from this
planet in another two and a half to four
years all life on this planet including
you and me and plant life everything
will be gone insects go away if all the
worms go away today in the next one and
a half to two years or two and a half
years all life on this planet will be
extinct if all the microbes go away we
both of us disappear within the next few
seconds this is the reality they are the
foundational life we are the cherry on
the cake right now average loss of
microbial life is like this 20 7,000
species of organisms are going extinct
per year 27,000 species are going
extinct per year at this rate it's
estimated in the next 25 to 40 years we
will come to a place where it'll be very
difficult for human beings to find basic
nourishment on the planet first thing
that will collapse is your software
that's what you're seeing in terms of
psychological ailments that's not the
only reason all those things are there
but the most important thing is lack of
nourishment just to give you a
perspective some studies are been done
in California what they are saying is in
1920 if you ate one orange what
nutrients you got from that if you want
that today you need to eat eight oranges
has there been a day when you ate eight
oranges in a day no this goes for
everything else you are eating empty
food which doesn't have richness just
look at the Google Map don't don't go by
what I say just look at the Google map
of the world how many green patches how
many brown
patches it is
terrifying we have a closing tradition
on this podcast where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're going to leave the
question for who was that guy can't tell
you it's a
secret their question to to you not
knowing who it was for they didn't know
it was for you is what in your heart of
hearts matters to you I have only one
heart that also I gave away long time
ago heart of hearts I don't have all
those things I broke my heart into a
million pieces and threw it away in the
world I live not because of my values I
live not because of my morality I live
not because of some Commandments from
somewhere I live live out of my
Humanity thank
[Music]
you